RAFAEL IRIZARRY: We start by describing some principles for encoding data.
There are several approaches to our disposal,
including position, aligned lengths, angles, area, brightness,
and color hue.
In our first example, to illustrate how some of these strategies compare,
let's suppose we want to report the results from two
hypothetical polls, asking what browser you use,
what's your browser preference.
And the polls were taken in 2000, and then in 2015.
Here, for each year, we are simply comparing
four quantities, four percentages.
A widely used graphical representation of percentages, popularized
by Microsoft Excel, is the pie chart.
Here's the pie chart for our data.
There's two pie charts, one for 2000, one for 2015.
Here, we're representing quantities with both areas and angles,
since both the angle and area of each pie slice
is proportional to the quantity it represents.
This turns out to be a suboptimal choice,
since, as demonstrated by perception studies,
humans are not good at precisely quantifying angles,
and are even worse when only area is available.
This makes the donut chart, which only uses area, even worse
than the pie chart.
To see how hard it is to quantify angles and area,
note that the rankings and all the percentages in the plots
that we just saw changed from 2000 to 2015.
Can you determine the actual percentages and rank the browser's popularity?
Can you see how the percentages changed from 2000 to 2015?
It's not easy to tell from the plot.
In this case, simply showing the numbers is not only clearer,
but it would save us on print costs if making a paper version of our results.
If we write out the percentages, we quickly
see which browser is more popular, and how they changed from 2000 to 2015.
If we insist on a plot, the preferred way to plot these quantities
is to use length and positions, since humans are
much better at judging linear measures.
The bar plot uses this approach by using bars of length proportional
to the quantity of interest.
By adding a horizontal line at strategically chosen values,
in this case at every multiple of 10, we ease the quantifying
through the position of the top of the bars.
Compare these two plots.
Notice how much easier it is to see the differences in the bar plot.
In fact, we can now determine the actual percentages
by following a horizontal line to the y-axis.
If for some reason you need to make a pie chart,
do include the percentages as numbers to avoid having
to infer them from the angles or area.
In summary, position and length are the preferred way
to display quantities over angles, which are preferred over area.
Brightness and color are even harder to quantify than angles and area.
But, as we will see later, they are sometimes
useful when more than two dimensions are being displayed.