RAFAEL IRIZARRY: In this video, we describe yet another principle,
show the data.
We have focused on displaying single quantities across categories.
We now shift our attention to displaying data with a focus on comparing groups.
To motivate this principle, we go back to our artificial example
describing heights to an extraterrestrial, ET.
This time, let's assume ET is interested in the difference
in heights between males and females.
A commonly seen plot used for comparison between groups,
popularized by software such as Microsoft Excel,
shows the average and the standard error.
Now keep in mind, standard errors, which we define later,
are not the same as standard deviations.
Here's what the plot looks like.
The average of each group is represented by the top of each bar,
and the antenna that we see that expands out
is the average plus two standard errors.
If all ET receives is this plot, he will have
little information on what to expect if he meets
a group of humans, males and females.
Note that the bars go to 0.
Does this mean there are tiny humans measuring less than one foot?
Are all males taller than the tallest female?
Is there a range of heights?
ET can't answer these questions since we have provided almost no information
on the height distribution.
This brings us back to our principle, show the data.
The following simple ggplot code already generates a more informative plot
than the bar plot by simply showing all the points.
Just this little line of code shows you the points, the heights for females
and the height for males.
However, this plot has limitations as well.
Since we can't really see all the 216 and 708 points
plotted for females and males, respectively.
And many points are plotted above each other
so we don't know how many there are.
As we have described, visualizing the distribution is much more informative.
But before doing this, we point out two ways
we can improve a plot showing all the points.
The first is to add jitter.
Jitter is adding a small random shift to each point.
In this case, adding horizontal jitter does not
alter the interpretation since the height of the points doesn't change.
But we minimize the number of points that fall on top of each other
and, therefore, get a better sense of how many points there are
and how the data is distributed.
A second improvement comes from using alpha blending,
making the point somewhat transparent.
Without alpha blending, the more points fall
on top of each other, the darker the plot gets
in that region, which also helps us get a sense of how
the points are distributed.
Here's the same plot with jitter and alpha blending.
It just requires us to change a couple of arguments,
and immediately we get a much better sense of what
the distribution of the data is.
Now since there are so many points, it is
more effective to show distribution rather than show individual points.
In the next video, we'll show distributions,
and we'll learn some principles of how to best compare these distributions.