RAFAEL IRIZARRY: Vaccines have helped save millions of lives.
In the 19th century, before herd immunization
was achieved through vaccination programs,
deaths from infectious diseases, like smallpox and polio, were common.
However, today, despite all the scientific evidence
for their importance, vaccination programs
have become somewhat controversial.
The controversy started with a paper published in 1988
and led by Andrew Wakefield claiming there
was a link between the administration of the measles, mumps, and rubella MMR
vaccine, and the appearance of autism and bowel disease.
Despite much scientific evidence contradicting this finding,
sensationalist media reports and fear mongering from conspiracy theorists
lead parts of the public to believe that vaccines were harmful.
Some parents even stopped vaccinating their children.
This dangerous practice can be potentially disastrous,
given that the Center for Disease Control, CDC,
estimates that vaccination will prevent more than 21
million hospitalizations and 732,000 deaths
among children born in the last 20 years.
The 1988 paper has since been retracted, and Andrew Wakefield
was eventually struck off the UK medical register with a statement
and identifying deliberate falsification in the research published
in The Lancet, and was thereby barred from practicing medicine in the UK.
Yet misconceptions persist, in part, due to self-proclaimed activists
that continue to [spread] misinformation about vaccines.
Effective communication of data is a strong antidote
to misinformation and fear mongering.
Earlier we showed an example provided by the Wall Street Journal
showing data related to the impact of vaccines
on battling infectious diseases.
Here we reconstruct that example.
The data used in these plots were collected, organized,
and distributed by the Tycho project.
They include weekly reported counts data for 7 diseases from 1928 to 2011
from all 50 states.
We include the yearly totals in the DS labs package.
You can get it like this and look at the structure using this command.
For the plot there we're going to make in this video,
we create a temporary object called dat that stores all the measles data.
It includes a per 100,000 rate, orders states by average value of disease,
and removes Alaska and Hawaii, since they only
became states in the late 50s.
Here's the code where we define dat.
We can now easily plot disease rates for per year.
Here are the measles data for California.
We can use this simple code to show it.
We add a vertical line at 1963, since this
is when the vaccine was introduced.
Now can we show data for all states in one plot?
We have three variables to show, year, state, and rate.
In the Wall Street Journal figure, they use the x-axis
for year, the y-axis for state, and color hue represent rates.
We're using color to represent a continuous variable.
However, the color scale they use, which goes
from yellow to blue to green to orange to red can be improved.
When choosing colors to quantify a numeric variable,
we choose between two options, sequential and diverging.
Sequential palettes are suited for data that goes from high to low.
High values are clearly distinguished from the low values.
Here are some examples offered by the package R color Brewer.
On the other hand, diverging colors are used
to represent values that verge from a center.
We put equal emphasis on both ends of the data range, higher than the center
and lower than the center.
An example of when we would use a divergent pattern
would be if we were to show heights and standard deviations away
from the average.
Here is an example of divergent patterns available from R Color Brewer.
In our example, we want to use a sequential palette
since there is no meaningful center, just low and high rates.
We use the geometry geom_tile to tile the region
with colors representing disease rates.
We use square root transformation to avoid
having the really high counts dominate the plot.
Here's the code that generates a very nice and impactful plot.
This plot makes a very striking argument for the contribution of vaccines.
However, one limitation of this plot is that it uses color
to represent quantity, which we earlier explained makes it a bit harder to know
exactly how high it is going.
Position and length are better cues.
If we are willing to lose data information,
we can make a version of the plot that shows the values with position.
We can also show the average for the US, which we compute like this.
Now to make the plot, we simply use the geom_line geometry.
We are going to make every state the same color.
This is because it's harder to choose 50 distinct colors.
However, the plot is very impactful.
It shows very clearly how after the vaccine was introduced
the rates went down across all states.
It shows the same information as our previous plot,
but now we can actually see what the values are.